intelligence activities and the rights
of Americans book - final report of the
Select Committee to study governmental
operations with respect to intelligence
activities United States Senate together
with additional supplemental and
separate views April 26th 1976 Senate
Select Committee to study governmental
operations with respect to intelligence
activities Frank church Idaho chairman
John G tower Texas vice chairman Philip
a heart Michigan Walter F Mondale
Minnesota Walter de Huddleston Kentucky
Robert Morgan North Carolina Gary Hart
Colorado
Howard H Baker junior Tennessee Barry
Goldwater Arizona
Charles maxi Mathias jr. Maryland
richard s Schweiker Pennsylvania William
G Miller staff director Frederick AO
Schwarz jr. chief counsel Curtis our
smothers counsel to the minority
Audrey hatchery clerk of the committee
one introduction and summary the
resolution creating this committee
placed greatest emphasis on weather
intelligence activities threatened the
rights of American citizens footnote the
Senate specifically charged this
committee with investigating quote the
conduct of domestic intelligence or
counterintelligence operations against
United States citizens and quote the
resolution added several examples of
specific charges of possible illegal
improper or unethical governmental
intelligence activities as matters to be
fully investigated
CIA domestic activities Houston plan
surreptitious entries electronic
surveillance and mail opening end
footnote the critical question before
committee was to determine how the
fundamental liberties of the people can
be maintained in the course of the
government's effort to protect their
security the delicate balance between
these basic goals of our system of
government is often difficult to strike
but it can and must be achieved we
reject the view that the traditional
American principles of justice and fair
play have no place in our struggle
against the enemies of freedom moreover
our investigation has established that
the targets of intelligence activity
have ranged far beyond persons who could
properly be characterized as enemies of
freedom and have extended to a wide
array of citizens engaging in lawful
activity Americans have rightfully been
concerned since before World War two
about the dangers of hostile foreign
agents likely to commit acts of
espionage similarly the violent acts of
political terrorists can seriously
endanger the rights of Americans
carefully focused intelligence
investigations can help prevent such
acts but too often intelligence has lost
this focus and domestic intelligence
activities have invaded individual
privacy and violated the rights of
lawful assembly and political expression
unless new and tighter controls are
established by legislation domestic
intelligence activities threatened to
undermine our democratic society and
fundamentally alter its nature we have
examined three types of intelligence
activities affecting the rights of
American citizens
the first is intelligence collection
such as infiltrating groups with
informants wiretapping or opening
letters
the second is dissemination of material
which has been collected the third is
covert action designed to disrupt and
discredit the activities of groups and
individuals deemed a threat to the
social order these three types of
intelligence activity are closely
related in the practical world
information which is
by the intelligence community or used in
disruptive programs has usually been
obtained through surveillance footnote
just as the term intelligence activity
encompasses activities that go far
beyond the collection and analysis of
information the term intelligence
community includes persons ranging from
the President to the lowest field
operatives of the intelligence agencies
and footnote nevertheless a division
between collection dissemination and
covert action is analytically useful
both in understanding why excesses have
occurred in the past and in devising
remedies to prevent those excesses from
reoccurring a intelligence activity a
new form of governmental power to impair
citizens rights attention between order
and liberty is inevitable in any society
a government must protect its citizens
from those bent on engaging in violence
and criminal behavior or in espionage
and other hostile foreign intelligence
activity many of the intelligence
programs reviewed in this report were
established for those purposes
intelligence work has at times
successfully prevented dangerous and
abhorrent acts such as bombings and
foreign spying and aided in the
prosecution of those responsible for
such acts but intelligence activity in
the past decades has all too often
exceeded the restraints on the exercise
of governmental power which are imposed
by our country's constitution laws and
traditions excesses in the name of
protecting security are not a recent
development in our nation's history in
1798 for example shortly after the Bill
of Rights was added to the Constitution
the Alien and Sedition Acts were passed
these acts passed in response to fear of
pro-french subversion made it a crime to
criticize the government footnote the
alien Act provided for the deportation
of all aliens judged dangerous to the
peace and safety of the nation
the Sedition Act made it a federal crime
to publish false scandalous and
malicious writing against the United
States government the Congress or the
president would the intent to excite
against them the hatred of the good
people of the United States or to
encourage or abet any hostile designs of
any foreign nation against the United
States there were at least 25 arrests 15
indictments and 10 convictions under the
Sedition Act in footnote during the
Civil War President Abraham Lincoln
suspended the writ of habeas corpus
hundreds of American citizens were
prosecuted for anti-war statements
during World War one and thousands of
radical aliens were seized for
deportation
during the 1920 Palmer Raids during the
Second World War
over the opposition of J Edgar Hoover
and military intelligence 120,000
Japanese Americans were apprehended and
incarcerated in detention camps those
actions however were fundamentally
different from the intelligence
activities examined by this committee
they were generally executed overtly
under the authority of a statute or a
public executive order the victims knew
what was being done to them and could
challenge the government in the courts
and other forums intelligence activity
on the other hand is generally covert it
is concealed from its victims and is
seldom described in statutes or explicit
executive orders footnote many victims
of intelligence activities have claimed
in the past that they were being
subjected to hostile action by their
government prior to this investigation
most Americans would have dismissed
these allegations Senator Philip Hart
aptly described this phenomenon in the
course of the committee's public
hearings on domestic intelligence
activities quote as I'm sure others have
I have been told for years by among
others some of my own family
that this is exactly what the bureau was
doing all of the time and in my great
wisdom and high office I assured them
that they were wrong it just wasn't true
it
happen they wouldn't do it what you have
described is a series of illegal actions
intended squarely to deny First
Amendment rights to some Americans that
is what my children have told me was
going on now I did not believe it the
trick now as I see it mr. chairman is
for this committee to be able to figure
out how to persuade the people of this
country that indeed it did go on and how
shall we ensure that it will never
happen again
but it will happen repeatedly unless we
can bring ourselves to understand and
accept that it did go on and quote
Senator Philip Hart 11 1875 and footnote
the victim may never suspect that his
misfortunes are the intended result of
activities undertaken by his government
and accordingly may have no opportunity
to challenge the actions taken against
him it is of course proper in many
circumstances such as developing a
criminal prosecution for the government
to gather information about a citizen
and use it to achieve legitimate ends
some of which might be detrimental to
the citizen but in criminal prosecutions
the courts have struck a balance between
protecting the rights of the accused
citizen and protecting the society which
suffers the consequences of crime
essential to the balancing process are
the rules of criminal law which
circumscribed the techniques for
gathering evidence the kinds of evidence
that may be collected and the uses to
which that evidence may be put footnote
as the Supreme Court noted in Miranda v
Arizona even before the court required
law officers to advise criminal suspects
of their constitutional rights before
custodial interrogation the FBI had an
exemplary record in this area a practice
which the court said should be emulated
by state and local law enforcement
agencies this commendable FBI tradition
in the general field of law enforcement
presents a sharp contrast to the
widespread disregard of individual
rights in FBI domestic intelligence
operations examined in the balance of
this report and footnote in addition the
criminal defendant is given an
opportunity to discover
and then challenged the legality of how
the government collected information
about him and the use which the
government intends to make of that
information this committee has examined
a realm of governmental information
collection which has not been governed
by restraints comparable to those in
criminal proceedings we have examined
the collection of intelligence about the
political advocacy and actions and the
private lives of American citizens that
information has been used covertly to
discredit the ideas advocated and to
neutralize the actions of their
proponents as Attorney General Harlan
Fiske stone warned in 1924 when he
sought to keep federal agencies from
investigating political or other
opinions as opposed to conduct forbidden
by the laws quote when a police system
passes beyond these limits it is
dangerous to the proper administration
of justice and to human liberty which it
should be our first concern to cherish
there is always a possibility that a
secret police may become a menace to
free government and free institutions
because it carries with it the
possibility of abuses of power which are
not always quickly apprehended or
understood end quote
our investigation has confirmed that
warning we have seen segments of our
government in their attitudes and action
adopt tactics unworthy of a democracy
and occasionally reminiscent of the
tactics of totalitarian regimes we have
seen a consistent pattern in which
programs initiated with limited goals
such as preventing criminal violence or
identifying foreign spies were expanded
to what witnesses characterized as
vacuum cleaners sweeping in information
about lawful activities of American
citizens the tendency of intelligence
activities to expand beyond their
initial scope is a theme which runs
through every aspect of our
investigative findings intelligence
collection programs naturally generate
ever-increasing demands for new data and
once intelligence has been collected
there are strong pressures to use it
against the target
the pattern of intelligence agencies
expanding the scope of their activities
was well described by one witness who in
1970 had coordinated an effort by most
of the intelligence community to obtain
authority to undertake more illegal
domestic activity quote the risk was
that you would get people who would be
susceptible to political considerations
as opposed to national security
considerations or would construe
political considerations to be national
security considerations to move from the
kid with a bomb to the kid with a picket
sign and from the kid with the picket
sign to the kid with a bumper sticker of
the opposing candidate and you just keep
going down the line and quote in 1940
attorney General Robert Jackson saw the
same risk he recognized that using broad
labels like national security or
subversion to invoke the vast power of
the government is dangerous because
there are quote no definite standards to
determine what constitutes a subversive
activity such as we have for murder or
larceny end quote
Jackson added quote activities which
seem benevolent or helpful to
wage-earners persons on relief or those
who are disadvantaged in the struggle
for existence may be regarded as
subversive by those whose property
interests might be burdened there by
those who are in office are apt to
regard as subversive the activities of
any of those who would bring about a
change of administration some of our
soundest constitutional doctrines or
once punished as subversive we must not
forget that it was not so long ago that
both the term Republican and the term
Democrat were epithets with sinister
meaning to denote persons of radical
tendencies that were subversive of the
order of things then dominant end quote
this wise warning was not heeded in the
conduct of intelligence activity where
the eternal vigilance which is the price
of Liberty has been forgotten be the
questions we have directed our
investigation toward answering the
following questions
which governmental agencies have engaged
in domestic spying how many citizens
have been targets of governmental
intelligence activity what standards
have governed the opening of
intelligence investigations and when
have intelligence investigations been
terminated where have the targets fit on
the spectrum between those who commit
violent criminal acts and those who seek
only to dissent peacefully from
government policy to what extent has the
information collected included intimate
details of the targets personal lives or
their political views and has such
information been disseminated and used
to injure individuals what actions
beyond surveillance have intelligence
agencies taken such as attempting to
disrupt discredit or destroy persons or
groups who have been the targets of
surveillance have intelligence agencies
been used to serve the political aims of
presidents other high officials or the
agencies themselves how have the
agencies responded either to proper
orders or to excessive pressures from
their superiors to what extent have
intelligence agencies disclosed or
concealed them from outside bodies
charged with overseeing them have
intelligence agencies acted outside the
law what has been the attitude of the
intelligence community toward the rule
of law to what extent has the executive
branch and the Congress controlled
intelligence agencies and held them
accountable generally how well has the
federal system of checks and balances
between the branches worked to control
intelligence activity see summary of the
main problems the answer to each of
these questions is disturbing too many
people have been spied upon by too many
government agencies and too much
information has been collected the
government has often undertaken the
secret surveillance of citizens on the
basis of their political beliefs even
when those beliefs posed no threat of
violence or
illegal acts on behalf of a hostile
foreign power the government operating
primarily through secret informants but
also using other intrusive techniques
such as wire taps microphone bugs
surreptitious mail opening and break-ins
has swept in vast amounts of information
about the personal lives views and
associations of American citizens
investigations of groups deemed
potentially dangerous and even if groups
suspected of associating with
potentially dangerous organizations have
continued for decades despite the fact
that those groups did not engage in
unlawful activity groups and individuals
have been harassed and disrupted because
of their political views and their
lifestyles investigations have been
based upon vague standards whose breath
made excessive collection inevitable
unsavory and vicious tactics have been
employed including anonymous attempts to
break up marriages disrupt meetings
ostracize persons from their professions
and provoke target groups into rivalries
that might result in deaths intelligence
agencies have served the political and
personal objectives of presidents and
other high officials while the agencies
often committed excesses in response to
pressure from high officials in the
executive branch and Congress they also
occasionally initiated improper
activities and then concealed them from
officials whom they had a duty to inform
governmental officials including those
whose principal duty is to enforce the
law have violated or ignored the law
over long periods of time and have
advocated and defended their right to
break the law the constitutional system
of checks and balances has not
adequately controlled intelligence
activities until recently the executive
branch has neither delineated the scope
of permissible activities nor
established procedures for supervising
intelligence agencies Congress has
failed to exercise sufficient oversight
seldom questioning the use to which its
appropriations were being put
most domestic intelligence issues have
not reached the courts and in those
cases when they have reached the courts
the judiciary has been reluctant to
grapple with them each of these points
is briefly illustrated below and covered
in substantially greater detail in the
following sections of the report 1 the
number of people affected by domestic
intelligence activity United States
intelligence agencies have investigated
a vast number of American citizens and
domestic organizations FBI headquarters
alone has developed over 500,000
domestic intelligence files and these
have been augmented by additional files
at FBI field offices the FBI opened
65,000 of these domestic intelligence
files in 1972 alone in fact
substantially more individuals and
groups are subject to intelligence
scrutiny than the number of files would
appear to indicate since typically each
domestic intelligence file contains
information on more than one individual
or group and this information is readily
retrievable through the FBI general name
index the number of Americans and
domestic groups caught in the domestic
intelligence net is further illustrated
by the following statistics nearly a
quarter of a million first class letters
were opened and photographed in the
United States by the CIA between 1953
and 1973 producing a CIA computerized
index of nearly 1 and 1/2 million names
at least 130,000 first class letters
were opened and photographed by the FBI
between 1940 and 1966 in eight US cities
some 300,000 individuals were indexed in
a CIA computer system and separate files
were created on approximately 7,200
Americans and over 100 domestic groups
during the course of CIA's operation
chaos 1967 to 1973 millions of private
telegrams
from to or through the United States
were obtained by the National Security
Agency from 1947 to 1975 under a secret
arrangement with three United States
Telegraph companies an estimated 100,000
Americans were the subjects of United
States Army intelligence files created
between the mid-1960s and 1971
intelligence files on more than 11,000
individuals and groups were created by
the Internal Revenue Service between
1969 and 1973 and tax investigations
were started on the basis of political
rather than tax criteria at least 26
thousand individuals were at one point
cataloged on an FBI list of persons to
be rounded up in the event of a national
emergency - too much information is
collected for too long
intelligence agencies have collected
vast amounts of information about the
intimate details of citizens lives and
about their participation in legal and
peaceful political activities the
targets of intelligence activity have
included political adherence of the
right and the left ranging from
activists to casual supporters
investigations have been directed
against proponents of racial causes and
women's rights outspoken apostles of
non-violence and racial harmony
establishment politicians religious
groups and advocates of new lifestyles
the widespread targeting of citizens and
domestic groups and the excessive scope
of the collection of information is
illustrated by the following examples a
the women's liberation movement was
infiltrated by informants who collected
material about the movements policies
leaders and individual members one
report included the name of every woman
who attended meetings and another stated
that each woman at a meeting had
described how she felt oppressed
sexually or otherwise another report
concluded that the movements purpose was
to
women from the humdrum existence of
being only a wife and a mother but still
recommended that the intelligence
investigation should be continued be a
prominent civil rights leader and
advisor to dr. Martin Luther King jr.
was investigated on the suspicion that
he might be a communist sympathizer the
FBI field office concluded he was not
Bureau headquarters directed that the
investigation continue using a theory of
guilty until proven innocent quote the
bureau does not agree with the expressed
belief of the field office that redacted
is not sympathetic to the party cause
while there may not be any evidence that
redacted is a communist neither is there
any substantial evidence that he is
anti-communist end quote see FBI sources
reported on the formation of the
conservative American Christian Action
Council in 1971 in the 1950s the bureau
collected information about the John
Birch Society and passed it to the White
House because of the Society's quote
scurrilous attack and a quote on
President Eisenhower and other high
government officials D some
investigations of the lawful activities
of peaceful groups have continued for
decades for example the n-double-a-cp
was investigated to determine whether it
had connections with the Communist Party
the investigation lasted for over 25
years although nothing was found to
rebut a report during the first year of
the investigation that the n-double-a-cp
had a strong tendency to steer clear of
communist activities similarly the FBI
has admitted that the Socialist Workers
Party has committed no criminal acts yet
the bureau has investigated the
Socialist Workers Party for more than
three decades on the basis of its
revolutionary rhetoric which the FBI
concedes falls short of incitement to
violence and it's claimed international
links the Bureau is currently using its
informants to collect information
swp members political views including
those on u.s. involvement in angola food
prices racial matters the vietnam war
and about any of their efforts to
support non swp candidates for political
office e national political leaders fell
within the broad reach of intelligence
investigations for example army
intelligence maintained files on senator
Adlai Stevenson and Congressman Abner
Mikva because of their participation in
peaceful political meetings under
surveillance by army agents a letter to
Richard Nixon while he was a candidate
for president in 1968 was intercepted
under CIA's mail opening program in the
1960s President Johnson asked the FBI to
compare various senators statements on
Vietnam with the communist party line
and to conduct name checks on leading
anti-war senators F as part of their
effort to collect information which
quote related even remotely end quote to
people or groups active in communities
which had the potential for civil
disorder army intelligence agencies took
such steps as sending agents to a
Halloween party for elementary school
children in Washington DC because they
suspected a local dissident might be
present monitoring protests of welfare
mothers organizations in Milwaukee
infiltrating a coalition of church youth
groups in Colorado and sending agents to
a priests conference in Washington DC
held to discuss birth control measures G
in the late 1960s and early 1970s
student groups were subjected to intense
scrutiny in 1970 the FBI ordered
investigations of every member of these
students for a Democratic Society and of
every black Student Union and similar
group regardless of their past or
present involvement in disorders files
were opened on thousands of young men
and women so that as the former head of
FBI intelligence explained the
information could be used if they ever
applied for a government job
in the 1960s Bureau agents were
instructed to increase their efforts to
discredit new left student demonstrators
by tactics including publishing
photographs quote naturally the most
obnoxious picture should be used end
quote
using misinformation to falsely notify
members events had been cancelled and
writing telltale letters to students
parents H the FBI Intelligence Division
commonly investigated any indication
that subversive groups already under
investigation were seeking to influence
or control other groups one example of
the extreme breadth of this infiltration
theory was an FBI instruction in the
mid-1960s to all field offices to
investigate every free University
because some of them had come under
subversive influence I each
administration from Franklin D Roosevelt
to Richard Nixon's permitted and
sometimes encouraged government agencies
to handle essentially political
intelligence for example President
Roosevelt asked the FBI to put in its
files the names of citizens sending
telegrams to the White House opposing
his national defense policy and
supporting Colonel Charles Lindbergh
President Truman received inside
information on a former Roosevelt aides
efforts to influence his appointments
labor union negotiating plans and the
publishing plans of journalists
President Eisenhower received reports on
purely political and social contacts
with foreign officials by Bernard barek
mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt and Supreme Court
Justice William O Douglas the Kennedy
administration had the FBI wiretap a
congressional staff member three
executive officials a lobbyist and a
Washington law firm attorney General
Robert F Kennedy received the fruits of
an FBI tap on Martin Luther King jr. and
a bug on a congressman both of which
yielded information of a political
nature
President Johnson asked the FBI to
conduct name-check
his critics and of members of the staff
of his 1964 opponent senator Barry
Goldwater he also requested purely
political intelligence on his critics in
the Senate and received extensive
intelligence reports on political
activity at the 1964 Democratic
convention from FBI electronic
surveillance
President Nixon authorized a program of
wiretap which produced for the White
House purely political or personal
information unrelated to national
security including information about a
Supreme Court justice three covert
action and the use of illegal or
improper means a covert action
apart from uncovering excesses in the
collection of intelligence our
investigation has disclosed covert
actions directed against Americans and
the use of illegal and improper
surveillance techniques to gather
information for example one the FBI's
COINTELPRO counterintelligence program
was designed to disrupt groups and
neutralize individuals deemed it to be
threats to domestic security the FBI it
resorted to counterintelligence tactics
in part because its chief officials
believed that the existing law could not
control the activities of certain
dissident groups and that Court
decisions had tied the hands of the
intelligence community whatever opinion
one holds about the policies of the
targeted groups many of the tactics
employed by the FBI were indisputably
degrading to a free society COINTELPRO
tactics included anonymously attacking
the political beliefs of targets in
order to induce their employers to fire
them anonymously mailing letters to the
spouses of intelligence targets for the
purpose of destroying their marriages
obtaining from IRS the tax returns of a
target and then attempting to provoke an
IRS investigation for the express
purpose of deterring a protest leader
from attending the Democratic National
Convention falsely and anon
labeling as government informants
members of groups known to be violent
thereby exposing the falsely labeled
member to expulsion or physical attack
pursuant to instructions to use
misinformation to disrupt demonstrations
employing such means as broadcasting
fake orders on the same citizens band
radio frequency used by demonstration
marshals to attempt to control
demonstrations and duplicating and
falsely filling out forms soliciting
housing for persons coming to a
demonstration thereby causing long and
useless journeys to locate these
addresses sending an anonymous letter to
the leader of a Chicago street gang
described as violence-prone stating that
the Black Panthers were supposed to have
a quote hid out for you end quote
the letter was suggested because it
quote may intensify animosity end quote
and caused the street gang leader to
take retaliatory action - from late 1963
until his death in 1968 Martin Luther
King jr. was the target of an intensive
campaign by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to neutralize him as an
effective civil rights leader in the
words of the man in charge of the FBI's
war against dr. King no holds were
barred the FBI gathered information
about dr. King's plans and activities
through an extensive surveillance
program employing nearly every
intelligence gathering technique at the
bureau's disposal in order to obtain
information about the private activities
of dr. King and his advisers to use to
completely discredit them the program to
destroy dr. King as the leader of the
civil rights movement included efforts
to discredit him with executive branch
officials congressional leaders foreign
heads of state American ambassadors
churches universities and the press the
FBI mailed dr. King a tape recording
made from microphones hidden in his
hotel rooms which one agent testified
was an attempt to destroy dr. King's
marriage the tape recording was
accompanied by a note which dr. King and
his advisers interpreted
threatening to release the tape
recording unless dr. King committed
suicide the extraordinary nature of the
campaign to discredit dr. King is
evident from two documents at the August
1963 march on Washington dr. King told
the country of his dream that quote all
of God's children black men and white
men Jews and Gentiles Protestants and
Catholics will be able to join hands and
sing in the words of the old Negro
spiritual free at last free at last
thank God Almighty I'm free at last end
quote
the bureau's domestic intelligence
division concluded that this demagogic
speech established dr. King as the quote
most dangerous and effective Negro
leader in the country end quote
shortly afterwards and within days after
dr. King was named Man of the Year by
Time magazine
the FBI decided to quote take him off
his pedestal
end quote reduce him completely in
influence and select and promote its own
candidate to quote assume the role of
the leadership of the Negro people end
quote in early 1968 Bureau headquarters
explained to the field that dr. King
must be destroyed because he was seen as
a potential messiah who could unify and
electrify the black nationalist movement
indeed to the FBI he was a potential
threat because he might abandon his
supposed obedient to white liberal
doctrines non-violence in short a
non-violent man was to be secretly
attacked and destroyed as insurance
against his abandoning non-violence be
illegal or improper means the
surveillance which we investigated was
not only vastly excessive in breath and
a basis for degrading
counterintelligence actions but was also
often conducted by illegal or improper
means for example one for approximately
20 years the CIA carried out a program
of indiscriminate
the opening citizens first-class mail
the bureau also had a male opening
program but canceled it in 1966 the
bureau continued however to receive the
illegal fruits of the CIA's program in
1970 the heads of both agencies signed a
document for President Nixon which
correctly stated that male opening was
illegal falsely stated that it had been
discontinued and proposed that the
illegal opening of mail should be
resumed because it would provide useful
results the president approved the
program but withdrew his approval five
days later the illegal opening continued
nonetheless throughout this period CIA
officials knew that male opening was
illegal but expressed concern about the
flap potential of exposure not about the
illegality of their activity - from 1947
until May 1975 NSA received from
international cable companies millions
of cables which had been sent by
American citizens in the reasonable
expectation that they would be kept
private 3 since the early 1930s
intelligence agencies have frequently
wiretapped and bugged American citizens
without the benefit of judicial warrant
recent Court decisions have curtailed
the use of these techniques against
domestic targets but past subjects of
these surveillances have included a
United States congressman a
congressional staff member journalists
and news men and numerous individuals
and groups who engaged in no criminal
activity and who posed no genuine threat
to the national security such as to
White House domestic affairs advisors
and an anti Vietnam war protest group
while the prior written approval of the
Attorney General has been required for
all warrantless wiretaps since 1940 the
record is replete with instances where
this requirement was ignored and the
Attorney General gave only after the
fact
authorization until 1965 microphone
surveillance by intelligence agencies
was wholly
regulated in certain classes of cases
within weeks after a 1954 Supreme Court
decision denouncing the FBI's
installation of a microphone in a
defendant's bedroom the Attorney General
informed the bureau that he did not
believe the decision applied to national
security cases and permitted the FBI to
continue to install microphones subject
only to its own intelligent restraint
for in several cases purely political
information such as the reaction of
Congress to at administration's
legislative proposal and purely personal
information such as coverage of the
extramarital social activities of a
high-level executive official under
surveillance was obtained from
electronic surveillance and disseminated
to the highest levels of the federal
government five warrantless break-ins
have been conducted by intelligence
agencies since World War two during the
1960's alone the FBI and CIA conducted
hundreds of break-ins many against
American citizens and domestic
organizations in some cases these
break-ins were to install microphones in
other cases they were to steal such
items as membership lists from
organizations considered subversive by
the bureau six the most pervasive
surveillance technique has been the
informant in a random sample of domestic
intelligence cases 83% involved
informants and 5% involved electronic
surveillance informants have been used
against peaceful law-abiding groups they
have collected information about
personal and political views and
activities to maintain their credentials
and violence-prone groups informants
have involved themselves in violent
activity this phenomenon is well
illustrated by an informant in the Klan
he was present at the murder of a civil
rights worker in Mississippi and
subsequently helped to solve the crime
and convict the perpetrators earlier
however while performing duties paid for
by the government he had previously
quote beaten people severely had boarded
buses and kick
people had gone into restaurants and
beaten them blacks with Blackjacks
chains pistols end quote although the
FBI requires agents to instruct
informants that they cannot be involved
in violence it was understood that in
the Klan quote he couldn't be an angel
and to be a good informant end quote for
ignoring the law officials of the
intelligence agencies occasionally
recognized that certain activities were
illegal but expressed concern only for
flap potential even more disturbing was
the frequent testimony that the law and
the Constitution were simply ignored for
example the author of the so-called
Houston plan testified questioned was
there any person who stated that the
activity recommended which you have
previously identified as being illegal
opening of the mail and breaking and
entering or burglary was there any
single person who stated that such
activities should not be done because it
was unconstitutional answer no question
was there any single person who said
such activity should not be done because
it was illegal answer no similarly the
man who for 10 years headed FBI's
Intelligence Division testified that
quote never once did I hear anybody
including myself raise the question is
this course of action which we have
agreed upon lawful is it legal is it
ethical or moral we never gave any
thought to this line of reasoning
because we were just naturally pragmatic
end quote
although the statutory law and the
Constitution were often not given a
thought there was a general attitude
that intelligence needs were responsive
to a higher law thus as one witness
testified in justifying the FBI's male
opening program quote it was my
assumption that what we were doing was
justified by what we had to do the
greater good the national security end
quote
v
deficiencies and accountability and
control the overwhelming number of
excesses continuing over a prolonged
period of time were due in large measure
to the fact that the system of checks
and balances created in our Constitution
to limit abuse of governmental power was
seldom applied to the intelligence
community guidance and regulation from
outside the intelligence agencies where
it has been imposed at all has been
vague presidents and other senior
executive officials particularly the
attorneys general have virtually
abdicated their constitutional
responsibility to oversee and set
standards for intelligence activity
senior government officials generally
gave the agency's broad general mandates
or pressed for immediate results on
pressing problems in neither case did
they provide guidance to prevent
excesses and their broad mandates and
pressures themselves often resulted in
excessive or improper intelligence
activity Congress has often declined to
exercise meaningful oversight and on
occasion has passed laws or made
statements which were taken by
intelligence agencies as supporting
overly broad investigations on the other
hand the record reveals instances where
intelligence agencies have concealed
improper activities from their superiors
in the executive branch and from the
Congress or have elected to disclose
only the less questionable aspects of
their activities there has been in short
a clear and sustained failure by those
responsible to control the intelligence
community and to ensure its
accountability there has been an equally
clear and sustained failure by
intelligence agencies to fully inform
the proper authorities of their
activities and to comply with directives
from those authorities 6 the adverse
impact of improper intelligence activity
many of the illegal or improper
disruptive efforts directed against
American citizens and domestic
organizations succeeded in injuring
their targets although it is sometimes
difficult to prove that a targets
fortunes were caused by a
counterintelligence program directed
against him the possibility that an arm
of the United States government intended
to cause the harm and might have been
responsible is itself abhorrent the
committee has observed numerous examples
of the impact of intelligence operations
sometimes the harm was readily apparent
destruction of marriages loss of friends
or jobs sometimes the attitudes of the
public and of government officials
responsible for formulating policy and
resolving vital issues were influenced
by distorted intelligence but the most
basic harm was to the values of privacy
and freedom which our Constitution seeks
to protect and which intelligence
activity infringed on a broad scale a
general efforts to discredit several
efforts against individuals and groups
appear to have achieved their stated
aims for example a bureau field office
reported that the anonymous letter it
had sent to an activists husband
accusing his wife of infidelity
contributed very strongly to the
subsequent breakup of the marriage
another field office reported that a
draft counselor deliberately and falsely
accused of being an FBI informant was
ostracized by his friends and associates
two instructors were reportedly put on
probation after the bureau sent an
anonymous letter to a university
administrator about their funding of an
anti administration student newspaper
the bureau evaluated its attempts to put
a stop to a contribution to the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference as quite
successful an FBI document boasted that
a pretext phone call to Stokely
Carmichael's mother telling her that
members of the Black Panther Party
intended to kill her son left her
shocked the memorandum intimated that
the bureau believed it had been
responsible for Carmichael's flight to
Africa the following day be media
manipulation the FBI has attempted
covertly to influence the public's
perception of persons and organizations
by disseminating
Roget ori information to the press
either anonymously or through friendly
news contacts the impact of those
articles is generally difficult to
measure although in some cases there are
fairly direct connections to injury to
the target the bureau also attempted to
influence media reporting which would
have any impact on the public image of
the FBI
examples include planting a series of
derogatory articles about Martin Luther
King jr. and the Poor People's Campaign
for example in anticipation of the 1968
poor people's March on Washington DC
bureau headquarters granted authority to
furnish cooperative news media sources
an article designed to curtail success
of Martin Luther King's fundraising
another memorandum illustrated how
photographs of demonstrators could be
used in discrediting the civil rights
movement six photographs of participants
in the Poor People's Campaign in
Cleveland accompanied the memorandum
with the following note attached these
photographs show the militant aggressive
appearance of the participants and might
be of interest to a cooperative news
source information on the Poor People's
Campaign was provided by the FBI to
friendly reporters on the condition that
the bureau must not be revealed as the
source soliciting information from field
offices on a continuing basis for prompt
dissemination to the news media to
discredit the new left movement and its
adherence the headquarters directive
requested among other things that quote
specific data should be furnished
depicting the scurrilous and depraved
nature of many of the characters
activities habits and living conditions
representative of new left adherence end
quote field offices were to be exhorted
that every avenue of possible
embarrassment must be vigorously and
enthusiastically explored or during
field offices to gather information
which would disprove allegations by the
quote liberal press the bleeding hearts
and the forces on the left end quote
that the Chicago Police used undue
force in dealing with demonstrators at
the 1968 Democratic convention taking
advantage of a close relationship with
the chairman of the board described in
an FBI memorandum as our good friend of
a magazine with national circulation to
influence articles which related to the
FBI for example through this
relationship the bureau squelched an
unfavorable article against the bureau
written by a freelance writer about an
FBI investigation postponed publication
of an article on another FBI case for
stalled publication of an article by dr.
Martin Luther King jr. and received
information about proposed editing of
king's articles see distorting data to
influence government policy and public
perceptions accurate intelligence is a
prerequisite to sound government policy
however as the past head of the FBI's
domestic Intelligence Division reminded
the committee quote the facts themselves
are not too meaningful they are
something like stones cast into a heap
end quote
on certain crucial subjects the domestic
intelligence agencies reported the facts
in ways that gave rise to misleading
impressions for example the FBI's
domestic Intelligence Division initially
discounted as an obvious failure the
alleged attempts of communists to
influence the civil rights movement
without any significant change in the
factual situation the bureau moved from
the divisions conclusion to Director
Hoover's public congressional testimony
characterizing communist influence on
the civil rights movement as vitally
important
FBI reporting on protests against the
Vietnam War
provides another example of the manner
in which the information provided to
decision-makers can be skewed in
acquiescence with a judgment already
expressed by President Johnson
the bureau's reports on demonstrations
against the war in Vietnam emphasized
communist efforts to influence the
anti-war movement and underplayed to the
fact that the vast majority of
demonstrators were not communist
controlled D
chillin First Amendment rights the First
Amendment protects the rights of
American citizens to engage in free and
open discussions and to associate with
persons of their choosing intelligence
agencies have on occasion expressly
attempted to interfere with those rights
for example one internal FBI memorandum
called for more interviews with new left
subjects quote to enhance the paranoia
endemic in these circles end quote and
quote get the point across there is an
FBI agent behind every mailbox end quote
more importantly the government's
surveillance activities in the aggregate
whether or not expressly intended to do
so
tends as the committee concludes at page
290 to deter the exercise of First
Amendment rights by American citizens
who become aware of the government's
domestic intelligence program e
preventing the free exchange of ideas
speakers teachers writers and
publications themselves or targets of
the FBI's counterintelligence program
the FBI's efforts to interfere with the
free exchange of ideas included
anonymously attempting to prevent an
alleged communist front group from
holding a forum on a Midwest campus and
then investigating the judge who ordered
that the meeting be allowed to proceed
using another confidential source in a
foundation which contributed to a local
college to apply pressure on the school
to fire an activist professor
anonymously contacting a university
official to him to persuade two
professors to stop funding a student
newspaper in order to eliminate what
voice the New Left has in the area
targeting the New Mexico free University
for teaching confrontation politics and
draft counseling training seven cost and
value domestic intelligence is expensive
we have already indicated the cost of
illegal and improper intelligence
activities in terms of the harm to
victims the injury to constitutional
values and
the damage to the democratic process
itself the cost in dollars is also
significant for example the FBI has
budgeted for fiscal year 1976 over 7
million dollars for its domestic
security informant program more than
twice the amount it spends on informants
against organized crime the aggregate
budget for FBI domestic security
intelligence and foreign
counterintelligence is at least eighty
million dollars in the late 1960s and
early 1970s when the bureau was joined
by the CIA the military and NSA and
collecting information about the
anti-war movement and black activists
the cost was substantially greater apart
from the excesses described above the
usefulness of many domestic intelligence
activities in serving the legitimate
goal of protecting society has been
questionable properly directed
intelligence investigations
concentrating upon hostile foreign
agents and violent terrorists can
produce valuable results the committee
has examined two cases were the FBI
uncovered illegal agents of a foreign
power engaged in clandestine
intelligence activities in violation of
federal law information leading to the
Prevention of serious violence has been
acquired by the FBI
through its informant penetration of
terrorist groups and through the
inclusion in Bureau files of the names
of persons actively involved in such
groups nevertheless the most sweeping
domestic intelligence survey programs
have produced surprisingly few useful
returns and view of their extent for
example between 1960 and 1974 the FBI
conducted over 500,000 separate
investigations of persons and groups
under the subversive category predicated
on the possibility that they might be
likely to overthrow the government of
the United States yet not a single
individual or group has been prosecuted
since 1957 under the laws which prohibit
planning or advocating action to
overthrow the government and which are
the main alleged statutory basis for
such FBI investigations a recent study
by the General Accounting Office has
estimated that of
17500 28 FBI domestic intelligence
investigations of individuals in 1974
only 1.3%
resulted in prosecution and conviction
and in only about 2% of the cases was
advanced knowledge of any activity legal
or illegal obtained one of the main
reasons advanced for expanded collection
of intelligence about urban unrest and
anti-war protests was to help
responsible officials cope with possible
violence however a former White House
official with major duties in this area
under the Johnson administration has
concluded in retrospect that in none of
these situations would advance
intelligence about dissident groups have
been much help that what was needed was
physical intelligence about the
geography of major cities and that the
attempt to predict violence was not a
successful undertaking domestic
intelligence reports have sometimes even
been counterproductive a local police
chief for example described FBI reports
which led to the positioning of federal
troops near his city as quote almost
completely composed of unsorted and unev
alyou ated stories threats and rumors
that had crossed my desk in New Haven
many of these had long before been
discounted by our intelligence division
but they had made their way from New
Haven to Washington had gained
completely unwarranted credibility and
had been submitted by the Director of
the FBI to the President of the United
States they seemed to present a
convincing picture of impending
Holocaust
end quote in considering its
recommendations the committee undertook
an evaluation of the FBI's claims that
domestic intelligence was necessary to
combat terrorism civil disorders
subversion and hostile foreign
intelligence activity the committee
reviewed voluminous materials bearing on
this issue and questioned Bureau
officials local police officials and
present and former federal executive
officials we have found that we are in
fundamental agreement with the wisdom of
attorney general stone's initial warning
that intelligence agencies must not be
concerned with political or other
opinions of individuals
and must be limited to investigating
essentially only such conduct as is
forbidden by the laws of the United
States
the committee's record demonstrates that
domestic intelligence which departs from
this standard raises grave risks of
undermining the democratic process and
harming the interests of individual
citizens this danger weighs heavily
against the speculative or negligible
benefits of the ill-defined and
over-broad investigations authorized in
the past
thus the basic purpose of the
recommendations contained in part four
of this report is to limit the FBI to
investigating conduct rather than ideas
or associations the excesses of the past
do not however justified depriving the
United States of a clearly defined and
effectively controlled domestic
intelligence capability the intelligence
services of this nation's international
adversaries continue to attempt to
conduct clandestine espionage operations
within the United States footnote an
indication of the scope of the problem
is the increasing number of official
representatives of communist governments
in the United States for example the
number of Soviet officials in this
country has increased from 333 in 1961
to 1079 by early 1975 there were 2000
683 east-west exchange visitors and 1500
commercial visitors in 1974 and footnote
our recommendations provide for
intelligence investigations of hostile
foreign intelligence activity
moreover terrorists have engaged in
serious acts of violence which have
brought death and injury to Americans
and threatened further such acts these
acts not the politics or beliefs of
those who would commit them are the
proper focus for investigations to
anticipate terrorist violence
accordingly the committee would permit
properly controlled intelligence
investigations in those narrow
circumstances footnote according to the
FBI there were 89 bombings attributable
to terrorist activity in 1975 as
compared with 45 in 1974 and at 24 in 19
three six persons died in terrorist
claimed bombings and 76 persons were
injured in 1975 five other deaths were
reported in other types of terrorist
incidents monetary damage reported in
terrorist bombings exceeded 2.7 million
dollars it should be noted however that
terrorist bombings are only a fraction
of the total number of bombings in this
country thus the 89 terrorist bombings
in 1975 were among a total of over 1,900
bombings most of which were not
according to the FBI attributable
clearly to terrorist activity and
footnote concentration on imminent
violence can avoid the wasteful
dispersion of resources which has
characterized the sweeping and fruitless
domestic intelligence investigations of
the past but the most important reason
for the fundamental change in the
domestic intelligence operations which
our recommendations propose is the need
to protect the constitutional rights of
Americans in light of the record of
abuse revealed by our inquiry the
committee is not satisfied with the
position that mere exposure of what has
occurred in the past will prevent its
recurrence clear legal standards and
effective oversight and controls are
necessary to ensure that domestic
intelligence activity does not itself
undermine the democratic system it is
intended to protect